So, in this sense, we're reflecting on all these beautiful, precious teachings we've been
so fortunate to get and think about. And of course, what's even more precious and more
meaningful and actually more beneficial is when we can absorb those teachings into our
minds and hearts and become more and more natural. Again, the main point of the Buddhist
teachings is to remove our obscurations. Why? Because that reveals our inherent nature.
And so, the main focus of today's contemplation and reflecting and what we're going to focus
on more within the Ngondro teachings is the Vajrasattva practice of purifying our obscurations
and using this great, powerful support of the Vajrasattva meditation and recitation.
So we'll go over that a little bit. Well, I think the most important thing, you know,
the teachings are always pointing out to us to remember. So we're not too caught up in
the gross kind of rough illusion. It's to remember the wisdom of the Buddhist teachings
and the big, big, beautiful, true view that we all have Buddha nature, that our innate
nature is limitless wisdom, intelligence, inseparable from loving kindness and the capacity to imme
asurably
benefit every living being who doesn't recognize their true nature and help mature them, bring
them to that realization. We all have beautiful nature. Again, it's just the degree to which
we recognize it or not is the only difference. So, like it says in one of the tantras of
the Buddha, the Heavantra Tantra, all beings are Buddhas by nature, but it's temporarily
concealed by advantageous stains of perception. So, I mean, that's just such a critically
important thing to recognize as we take refuge in the three jewels and the three roots and
in our practice, is having some degree of more confidence and trust in the truth of
the Buddha's realization. But at the heart of that is our own potential and our own just
natural goodness is there at the heart of everything, whether we recognize it or not.
And so, really, it's said in the teachings that the path of awakening to our bodhicitta,
to our absolute bodhicitta, to our true Buddhahood, to realizing the great perfection, that path
is really removing our obscurations. As we remove our obscurations in the teachings,
our innate Buddha nature, innate wisdom and our natural compassion, all of those qualities
we all have are more fully developed and shining, the more our obscurations are revealed. Our
obscurations are revealed to us and then we remove them. So, that's really that point.
If we didn't have Buddha nature, there'd be no reason to practice. Our Buddha nature
is the cause of our enlightenment. So, that's just like the example when we have dirty hands,
it's not that our hands are dirty, it's that we have dirt on our hands as a rough metaphor.
When a window is really dirty and hard to see through, it's not that the window itself
is dirty, it's that there's dirt on the window and we wash it. And if we put all those ingredients
together, the soap, the water, the friction, the rinse, then the result is there. We see
what was there to begin with. And so, that's, I think, really important to remember as we're
practicing. Our obscurations are what obscures us from recognizing our Buddha nature. So,
the Buddha initially gave, the very first teaching the Buddha gave in this human world,
the Four Noble Truths, the truth of suffering, the truth that there's not just suffering
and challenges, but there's causes for suffering and challenges. Those causes are our
misunderstanding
of things as they are, our ego clinging, our negative emotions and grasping are what perpetuate
our suffering, which perpetuate our samsara. So, samsara and suffering and obscurations,
they're all one and the same. Then, of course, the Buddha didn't just teach their suffering
and causes for suffering. He's pointing out from the most basic Buddhism and then just
becomes more and more direct what the Buddha is pointing out and directing, ushering our
minds towards realizing is that there's freedom from suffering. There's cessation of suffering,
the truth of cessation of suffering. And then there's causes for that. There's ways and
methods to remove the causes of our suffering and bring out our innate nature. And so that's
what the path we have, these are the teachings we have to explore and to try out and apply
to our lives. How beautiful. And so again, just kind of returning to that point, its
obscurations are samsara, who samsara are samsara. Everything comes down to our own mind and
recognizing
its qualities and removing our obscurations. And so all of our nundro practice is doing
that. And then with the Vajrasattva section in particular, we're kind of really focusing
on that. But again, as we'll talk as we go, none of the nundro is kind of really completely
separate from another. It's all bringing out beautiful aspects of that one whole practice.
So again, I took a few little notes so I didn't get too lost in space here. So as far as obsc
urations
go, as far as samsara goes, and finding the way to remove the causes of samsara and bring
out those beautiful nature, those are all the methods we have of the foundational Buddhism,
of Mahayana Buddhism, of Vajrayana Buddhism, all working in unity. That's what we're practicing
here. And so as far as obscurations go, it's told, there's how many obscurations? Basically
two obscurations is one. Again, we may have heard this, we may have not heard this. But
again, what makes all the difference is how much each one of us, myself included, really
contemplates this and really brings it to heart. So what are the two obscurations? They're
called emotional obscurations and conceptual obscurations or knowledge obscurations. Emotional
and conceptual. Emotional obscurations are much more rough, much more kind of our outer
samsara experience, the real rough stuff we notice first and engage with most often. But
of course it's all based on our knowledge obscurations, our very, very, very subtle
obscurations that are, you know, come right down to our basic not knowing. But now these
two obscurations are sometimes broken down into four obscurations where emotional obscurations
can be looked at two ways and conceptual obscurations looked at two ways. And so that's known as
karmic obscurations as far as the emotional obscurations can be broken down, kind of to
look at a little bit more, parse them out a little bit more, look at them a little more
clearly. Karmic obscurations and then our negative emotions, the obscurations of our
negative emotions. So our karmic obscurations are, again, the word karmic is there because
they're involved with our actions, our actions of body, speech, mind. And right, so those
are all caused by how we see things, our emotions, how much ignorance we have, how much hope
and fear we have, how many actions of our bodies and speech and habitual mind we have.
And so one way of understanding that is kind of from the ordinary level for every being
whatsoever there's two kinds of karmic obscurations or two kinds of ways in which we act that
cause more trouble for ourselves and others directly and indirectly. And those are sometimes
called natural, kind of natural karmic activities and kind of fabricated. So what does that
mean? So natural karmic activities are things like killing, stealing, abusive behavior,
hatred, you know, hatred, thoughts and actions, for example. That's all no matter what everybody's
harmed, we're harmed, others are harmed, doesn't matter. And then what's called more fabricated
karma is then more involved with our mind and as dharma practitioners. On the basic
level that means when we make a promise and go against it. And so then on levels of taking
the Buddhist teachings that would mean, you know, so in other words also that could be
all the kind of customs and laws and regulations just in the ordinary world and wherever we
are, those are kind of acting against those can cause us trouble on some degree, right.
And then on the spiritual level, when we begin to take like vows of the pratimoksha, whether
we're lay or non or monk, the vows we take there as the path of individual liberation,
not to kill, not to steal, not avoid sexual misconduct, you know, etc, etc. And then the
vows we can take as bodhisattva, seeing every single being as our mother, really engaging
with the bodhicitta, all the vows we take as bodhisattva, all our bodhisattva vows in conviction.
And then what we take on as Vajrayana practitioners of the purity. These are examples of fabricated
.
But when it's so involved again, what makes all the difference with karma, the Buddha
taught is how we feel about our actions, how much we think about them when we think and
how we really feel about them, when we whether it's positive, negative, neutral. If we think
about doing something and we feel good about it, that's first really powerful ingredient
for powerful karma. When we think about something and feel good about it, and then we do it,
and we feel good about it as we're doing it, that makes it even more powerful. When we
continue that action and bring it to fulfillment and still feel good about it, that makes it
all the most powerful, it's going to have the most powerful effect for ourselves and
others and ultimately, you know, in our own experience. And so, that's just something
to keep in mind with looking at our karmic, karmic obscurations. And they do intersect,
for example, in the teachings, it's taught, for example, killing. Every people are harmed
when we kill, but if we haven't taken a vow not to kill out of great reverence for life,
then maybe killing doesn't have quite the same karmic effect as if someone who's really
vowed not to kill. And then again, just being sober and like really recognizing the magnitude
and the beautiful power of our practice when we have our bodhicitta intention and motivation
and conviction and a vow in front of all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas to actualize our
bodhicitta for the benefit of all living beings. If we kill, what is that doing? That's even
more powerfully going against kind of these vows. And then on the Vajrayana level, seeing
all the apparent existence, all phenomena as the pure mandala of all the Buddhas, three
Kaya mandala, then what are we doing when we kill? Again, we can get complicated, but the
point is all of the vows we take are to help usher us, to help protect us, to help keep
us on the path. But they're beautiful, powerful means, you know, skillful means for bringing
out our goodness qualities and cherishing our motivation and our intention is so important
and beautiful. That's what's going to always bring us back to the right path and make all
the difference for the future, no matter what mistakes we make. So anyway, I was talking
about habitual, no, about karmic obscurations. And then of course, emotional obscurations
are the other part of that, the breakdown. And what are our emotional obscurations? That's
essentially we could look at the 84,000 emotions, which can be summarized as the five poisons
or the five basic emotions, ignorance, attachment, arrogance, jealousy, anger, you know, and
that can be broken down into the three basic emotions of ignorance, aversion, attachment,
you know, that basic again, the basic not knowing of ignorance. And then keeping that
in all of our actions of hope and fear, it's those things that propel all of our karmic
obscurations. So the less ego clinging we have, the less grasping we have, the more
we contemplate the teachings and practice, the more we're, we're more likely to refrain
from harm, engage and benefit, take responsibility for our own mind and our own actions and our
own liberation, and with the motivation to benefit others. And then again, just to go
a little bit more quickly now, as far as looking at the two obscurations as for like we talked
about, emotional obscurations looked at as karmic and emotional. And now as far as our
conceptual obscurations, that's again, on a little more very subtle level, looking on
more subtle level of our samsara. That has to do with our basic ignorance and misperception
of how things are. So that can be broken down into what's called conceptual obscurations,
and then the habitual obscurations. Our conceptual obscurations, really the way that's summed
up in the teachings is, that's the habit we all have of subject, object, action. I am,
the world exists, and there's the interactions between that we substantially, that I exist,
the world substantially exists, and there's activity. On whatever level, that habitual
pattern is an obscuration, because the Buddha taught, that's actually not how things are
deep down. It's vast freedom, always shining, always moving. And then the fourth obscuration
is more the habitual, and that is very, very, very, very subtle conceptual obscurations,
kind of very subtle echoes of these conceptual obscurations that are purified. It's sometimes
said that that's like if you have a box that had perfume in it, or a bottle with perfume,
and there's no more perfume, but you still smell the fragrance. It's like that level.
So again, the point of this is too, all we've heard as our progress on the path from beginning
up through realizing the true nature to total Buddhahood, when we look at that from the
point of obscurations, that's like the Buddha pointed out, right? These kind of signposts
and indications of our progress on the path, and as far as how that relates to removing
our obscurations, if we start by cutting down our rough activity of listening to the teachings,
applying the teachings, gradually we take them on more and more, we're purifying, we're
refraining from harm, engaging in benefit, generating merit, generating our wisdom and
purifying by those means. And then there's what's called the five paths, or one way of
the Buddha showed us of progressing the kind of a basic map for signposts of our realization.
And when we first begin, those five paths are what, the path of accumulation, the path of
joining, the path of seeing, the path of meditation, the path of no more learning. So one way in
the teachings, again, this is kind of just as a way of connecting with seeing how removing
our obscurations and the causes of our obscurations, the causes of our suffering, the causes of
our challenges, the causes of our mess, that's the path. And so, for example, when we perfected
the path of accumulation, maybe that's when we've really cut, really truly, deeply cut
off our karmic obscurations. And then when we've really, really perfected the path of
joining an application, we've really perfected and cleaned away, totally abandoned our emotional
obscurations. And that means, right, then the next, the path of seeing, when we see the
great emptiness as it is, subject, object, action, beyond all, any way we could stand
it up or see it intellectually, see the true nature as it is, the great emptiness, so clear
and vibrant. That's when our conceptual habitual, our conceptual obscurations are purified. And
then again, in the path of meditation, moving up through all the bhoomis, that's when these
very, very subtle obscurations are purified. And when that happens, then it's the path
of no more learning, which is to say, there's no more to purify. All our naturally inherent
enlightened qualities are fully awakened, fully developed, completely purified. We're
Buddhists and we're object of refuge for all beings, just acting naturally for the benefit
of beings appearing to them as needed. And now, as ordinary sentient beings, we're in
the beautiful place of having a teacher, of having these perfect teacher who has so beautifully
maintained these beautiful, precious teachings that help us to awaken to that. And so, like
I'm getting at, obscurations are our samsara. Removing them, purifying our obscurations
is the path. Another word that Rinpoche uses often, you know, for obscurations and kind
of violations of our vows and Samayas and our promises is mistakes. So recognizing our
mistakes is the path, a big part of the path and how beautiful we shouldn't be afraid.
Because again, like the Buddha taught, there's more than suffering and its causes. Our fundamental
nature is beautiful, is peace, is wisdom, is love, compassion, freedom, bodhichitta.
How beautiful. And so, when we have, get to our Vajrasattva practice, which I guess if
you have the sadhana is page 32 in this book. Purification of obscurations, the meditation
of Vajrasattva. So simple, so concise, so profound. Again, it's the whole path. So,
it's renowned as this Vajrasattva practice. We have what is known as the four supports,
the four powers of purification to purify. And that's known as the power of the object,
the power of uprooting, the power of actually purifying, uprooting obscurations, the power
of restoring, and then the power of the antidote. So in brief, the power of the object in this
sense is Vajrasattva, the Buddha Vajrasattva. And now, that can be understood as this is
called the outer Vajrasattva. The outer Vajrasattva is the Buddha Vajrasattva, known as the
sovereign
of all the Buddha mandalas. Embodiment of all the Buddhas is Vajrasattva. Vajrasattva is
so prime, so important, it's renowned as the Lord of all mandalas. Embodiment of all the
Buddhas of the past, present, future. And Vajrasattva is actually the root teacher of
the Dzogchen, teachings, even on the lineage way. And it's said again, when Vajrasattva
was manifest as an ordinary being on the path of learning, like so many great noble beings,
as a great bodhisattva, similar to Amitabha's, he made great vast aspiration. You know, may
any being who hears my name and practices on me, may all of their obscurations be completely
purified. And by the power of the truth of my conviction, the truth of my actions, the
truth of my word, if this can't happen, may I only achieve enlightenment and Buddhahood
if this is possible. And then again, through the great power and joy and love and true
conviction and joy of that animating that intention and that thought. And then that
that was followed through with all of the skillful means and actualizing his bodhicitta
all the way to Buddhahood. You know, through the power of all those coming together, that's
made this inseparable connection we have in this renowned practice of Vajrasattva. So
that's Vajrasattva on the outer level. And then it's really, again, important to recognize
inner Vajrasattva, who is the inner Vajrasattva. And the teachings, the inner Vajrasattva is
our own devotion. The inner Vajrasattva is our joy and our appreciation. Inner Vajrasattva
is our refuge, our closeness feeling, our trust in the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha. It's
our bodhicitta. It's our deep confidence and joy, devotion, trust, closeness feeling with
the true nature and with the lineage and with our teacher. That's the inner, inner Vajrasattva.
And then it's our practice, right, that's joining the two of making the union of the
actualized Vajrasattva with our joy, our devotion is the breath that creates our, you know,
our union, removes our obscurations. That's the power of the object. Then we have the
power of uprooting. Again, we're uprooting our obscurations. And that means we're recognizing
a mistake as a mistake. Like it said, it's so renowned, the teaching of the Buddha, you
know, the words of the Buddha. The only good thing about mistakes and negative actions
is that the only good thing about them is they can be purified. So recognizing a mistake
as a mistake is wonderful, though we all know how painful it can be. But that's kind of
where the power of restoration comes in and the power of the antidote. But uprooting means
recognizing a mistake as a mistake. And again, let's remember too, there's different ways
we make mistakes. We make mistakes, the most common way we can make mistakes is by just
not knowing, not knowing better, not knowing how things are, not knowing the effects of
our actions and our attitudes for ourselves and others, not knowing is a major way we
make mistakes. Another way we make mistakes is through maybe we know or we've heard but
we forget. Another third way we make mistake out of the four is maybe we know better but
for whatever reasons out of disrespect and disregarding what we do know of the laws of
karma, the inevitability of cause and effect, for whatever reasons out of disrespect we
go against what we know is better. The fourth way we make mistakes is even though we know
better and we really want to do better, our emotions get the best of us and we're distracted
by our emotions. These are the main ways we make mistakes, whether it's in the ordinary
world with kind of the promises we make for ourselves and others or you know kind of the
ways we go about just acting in the world as ordinary beings, the same as on whatever
ways we're working on the pratimoksha level of our practice or the bodhisattva level of
our practice or the vidyadhara mantra on the level of our practice. These are the four
ways we make mistakes and when we're recognizing a mistake as a mistake it's good and as soon
as we recognize a mistake we should purify it. That's the best way they say like cleaning
the lamp while it's hot. So that's to say like using the metaphor like if you have candles
on your shrine, wax candles, or this is referring to like a butter lamp, if the lamp goes out
and there's the wax there, if you clean it right away while it's still hot, the wax is
still hot and the lamp is still hot, it's so easy but if we let it sit you know the
wax gets hard, it's really harder to get out and it's similar on the level of our mistakes.
If we recognize a mistake as a mistake but we don't do anything to really look at it
clearly and really feel how we feel about it and really recognize it was a mistake and
try to purify it then it just becomes more heavy and harder to becomes more habitual
essentially. So we want to purify a mistake as soon as we can and so that's why it's important
you know when we're doing going through again as we're doing these four powers they're all
working together, Vajrasattva, we're uprooting, we're recognizing our mistakes as mistakes,
we're then the fourth power, we're restoring, we're feeling that deep remorse not shying
away from it but we're not punishing ourselves or beating ourselves up for it, we're just
truly purely feeling the remorse of the mistakes we've made, really connecting with that, that's
the power of restoring so not only feeling the remorse but again connecting with well
what's our really true intention and our true wish, what do we really hold dear and true
and valuable but to really how do we really wish we had behaved, what do we want how do
we want to act in the future from this moment on you know that's what's going to help not
to repeat you know have that strong conviction not to repeat our mistakes which means what
makes really helps direct that is knowing what we also want to do, where we want to
go, what view we want to hold, what conduct we really cherish and want to uphold and respect
in order to actualize our bodhicitta and so therefore it said as we're uprooting and restoring
really feeling that living presence of our own teacher of this life is with us, inseparable
from all the buddhas of the three times manifest as glorious vajrasattva whose omniscient who
sees everything all of our misdeeds misunderstandings whether we recognize it or not the buddhas
see clearly you know so just again really calling to mind as we're uprooting our mistakes
it's it's really given in the teachings really look at them square on really call to mind
into heart the mistakes we've made with our loved ones in the world the way we've gone
all the like if we want to look at the ten non-virtues of body speech mind we've engaged
with or want to look at on whatever level the vows we've taken before the buddhas and
bodhisattvas before our precious teachers living teachers in this world you know any
ways we've gone against are the promises we've made with ourselves and our precious lineage
looking at that squarely clearly anything the smallest harm to big big mistakes look
at them remembering the time the place the motivation calling it to heart and then of
course there's so many things we're completely unaware of again if we look at these four
ways we make mistakes all the things we've done just not knowing better not having the
complete picture you know where our arrogance gets the better of us where our emotions get
the better of us whatever it is really looking at it and then fundamentally knowing we just
don't see there's so much we don't see and don't know including the deepest level that
we haven't recognized our pure nature that's the ultimate mistake and the big stain we're
cleaning right so really not shying away from that and then with that remorse that we feel
letting that instead of beating ourselves up or feeling bad about it taking full responsibility
and really bringing it back to what is our true motivation really having that conviction
of the fourth power I do not to repeat restoring our vows means what we're going to refrain
from doing in the future with our real conviction not to repeat and more so what we really value
and are going to engage with as far as our bodhicitta and our our practice and then we're
using the fourth power the power of the antidote which is again part of all of this but then
as we do the practice when we get to it maybe what we'll do is I'm talking a little bit
long now let's start our practice and when we get to the the power of the antidote that's
where again we use this skillful means practice of visualizing Vajrasattva inseparable from
the teacher so we'll go over once we get to that part in the practice we'll go over visualizing
Vajrasattva above our head in yabhiyam with nyema you know with the nectar is coming cleansing
us removing all of our obscurations the causes and results of our obscurations clarifying
purifying all of our karmic debts until the whole universe is just purified and revealed
as the three kaya mandala of Vajrasattva and then we just abide in that nature which is
the ultimate purification of resting in Rigpa so that's using the four powers so once we
get to that we'll just review that aspect a little bit and now I'll stop talking I hope
this is helpful of course the Dharma is so vast so profound there's so many details but
just kind of touching on some of these really basic elements purifying our obscurations
that it's our obscurations are all that's veiling us from experiencing the beautiful
enlightened nature and really letting our bodhichitta be totally natural in its full
bloom state and using these skillful means to purify our gross emotions and conceptions
to the most all the way to Buddhahood that's the path and then this is all like why we're
embodiment of our precious teacher embodiment of all the Buddhas alive and living in this
life receiving those blessings mingling our own mind with the mind of the fully enlightened
Buddha and resting in that state wonderful so let's do that we'll just rest for a few
moments in silence and then we'll we'll quickly with a heart and mind of bodhichitta aspiration
and then invoking all the lineage masters will recite the seven-line prayer and then
we'll go right to calling the Lama from afar and move through the outer nundra the inner
nundra practice okay so thank you so we'll just be silent just rest our awareness again
watch home base relax our body feel our posture let our winds flow natural relax our mind
connect with our three motivations
oh boy jin you jinu chance on pete my guess I don't know
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah who we'll go to the calling the Lama from afar which is seven-line prayer is calling
the Lama from afar but now we'll just connect to this beautiful prayer of realization from
Dajjum so this is on page 18 in the nundra the essence primordally unchanging the innate
nature free from elaboration dwells as the youthful vase body the originally pure profound
clarity dharmakaya lama yeshe dorje be aware of me please grant the blessings to attain
great confidence in the view the nature unceasing conjoined configuration of luminous clarity
dwells as the display of the spontaneously present five certainties sambogakaya lama
dachan dorje be aware of me please grant the blessings to perfect great ability in meditation
the compassion without bias the primordial wisdom free from all limitations dwells as
the essence of all-pervading naked awareness emptiness nirmanakaya lama drodolingpa be
aware of me please grant the blessings to accomplish great progress and action the primordial
ground of one's own awareness is unchanging and unmoving whatever arises as the expression
of dharmakaya is neither good nor bad since awareness of nowness is actually the Buddha
the completely free serene lama is revealed in one's innermost heart when this original
mind is realized as the very nature of the lama there is no need for whining contrived
prayers made with grasping and attachment by letting go in the free natural flow of
uncontrived awareness not holding whatever arises the blessings of self-liberation are
obtained through fabricated practice there is no time to achieve enlightenment this meditation
produced through mental analysis and intellect is a deceiving enemy now conceptualization
falls apart with the abandon of a madman let this life be spent in a state of uninhibited
naked ease whatever one does joyful practitioner of the great perfection in any company happy
lineage holder of the lotus born protector without rival great treasure revealing lama
teachings beyond compare heart essence of the takinis by dispelling the heart's darkness
great ignorance in its own place the undiminished son of luminous clarity shines continuously
this good fortune is the kindness of the lama the only father unrepayable kindness only
remember the llama unrepayable kindness only remember the llama unrepayable kindness only
remember the llama
continue the four renunciation thoughts the outer non-drug
ola machin dajo dinissin to net parka chece mita chi wei chuchen yin gedig lechi judre
loa met kamsung kor wa dukna jam su nang rene da glo chula chur wa shok
namo lama infallible constant protector be aware of me the freedoms and favorable conditions
of this human birth are extremely difficult to obtain everything born is impermanent and
bound to die the results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions which are causes are inexorable the
three realms of cyclic existence have the nature of an ocean of suffering remembering
this may my mind turn towards the dharma namo lama infallible constant protector be aware
of me the freedoms and favorable conditions of this human birth are extremely difficult
to obtain everything born is impermanent and bound to die the results of virtuous and unvirtuous
actions which are causes are inexorable the three realms of cyclic existence have the
nature of an ocean of suffering remembering this may my mind turn towards the dharma namo
lama infallible constant protector be aware of me the freedoms and favorable conditions
of this human birth are extremely difficult to obtain everything born is impermanent and
bound to die the results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions which are causes are inexorable the
three realms of cyclic existence have the nature of an ocean of suffering remembering this may
my mind turn towards the dharma
in the presence of gurumpashe in all the lineage refuge tree before us along with all beings
of the six realms and we'll make take our refuge with prostration so we'll recite this
a few times together and then we'll get up and we'll do the refuge with prostrations
for maybe about five minutes or so the song chung chung ning po mato bar llama cun cho
sum la chab su ji from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I take refuge in
the llama the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I take
refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment
I take refuge in the llama the three jewels we'll all do the meditation with the refuge
motivation and conviction for a little bit about four or five minutes the song chung
chung ning po mato bar llama cun cho sum la chab su ji from now until attaining the heart
of enlightenment I take refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining
the heart and the two jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment I take
refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment
I take refuge in the llama the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment
I take refuge in the moon the three jewels from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment
I take refuge in the llama the three jewels
and reappearing again before guru pachay and all the buddhas bodhisattvas our living teacher
will make our bodhicitta vows with the meditation and again I'm just saying this in case there's
anyone new here and unfamiliar but we'll say a few times together and then we'll all go
at our own rate recite as we're reciting the bodhicitta vow with great compassion and bodhicitta
emanating pure light to all beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish
the benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes
empty I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings from
now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient
parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all
sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits
of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the
benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish
the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall
accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty
I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes
empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara
becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until
samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from
now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits from now until samsara becomes
empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara
becomes empty from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness
of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the
benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty
I shall accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings
from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent
beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient
parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all
sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits
of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the
benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish
the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall
accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty
I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes
empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara
becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until
samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from
now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from
now
until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the benefits of all sentient parent beings from now
the body's enjoyment's possessions and glory's possession of all my love
the body's enjoyment's possessions and glory's possession
I offer to the three jewels from the two humanations
the body's enjoyment's possessions and glories of the succession of all my lifetimes
I offer to the three jewels in order to complete the two accumulations
of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the
benefits of all sentient parent beings from now until samsara becomes empty I shall accomplish the
state of our own innate rickpa all the blessings of vajrasattva so again power of the object vajras
attva
the outer vajrasattva uniting with our inner vajrasattva of our joy devotion our bodhicitta
that's that's what's removing all of our obscurations and the veils of our delusion
purifying bringing out the beautiful immaculate state of the nature and bodhicitta
and then we're purifying of our mistakes recognizing our mistakes
clearly as much as we can and of course as we all know as you're doing the practice sometimes
we begin to even remember things we totally forgot but to some degree recognize our mistakes
clearly vividly feeling our remorse recognizing so much we don't know including just the true
nature acknowledging that too and connecting with our beautiful motivation to not repeat our
mistakes
and to what we truly do want to engender to actualize our bodhicitta to really be less and
less you know obsessed with our samsara and its causes and more and more engaged with
the cause of happiness for ourselves and all beings the path of liberation and truly wishing
to absorb that into our minds and hearts and realization bring out our bodhicitta and purity
awareness however we want to term it and then using the power of the antidote so here we are
the precious teacher
who has the precious instructions and nectar blessings to really record for us to recognize
our true nature so like it says above one's head is vatrasattva inseparable from the lama
so our own precious living teacher of this life inseparable from guru patma sambhava
inseparable from vatrasattva embodiment of all the buddhas of the three times
is vividly clearly feel that presence right above our crown i say about one cubit one forearm
length
above our head is vatrasattva and how is vatrasattva appearing in this specific practice vatrasatt
va
from our the the crown of our head coming out from our central channel is a luminous stem and then
again one cubit above our head is a thousand petal white lotus
pure brilliant white on that is a on the pollen bed of the thousand petal lotus is a beautiful
pristine white moon disc lying on the the pollen bed on that is glorious vatrasattva you know
with one one face two arms two legs brilliant white like they say like um a million suns
shining on a pure snow mountain this brilliant white and adorned you know wearing all the
sambhogakaya ornaments the crowns silks and scarves and jewels and bells and then
in vatrasattva's right hand is of course holding the vadra at the heart and then in the left hand
holding uh the bell jubu at the hip and in this practice too then vatrasattva is above us in
yabium in union with the great wisdom consort nemma who's also brilliant white in sambhogakaya
posture in sambhogakaya dress and then she has her complexion has brilliant white but then a
little reddish tinge and she's holding in her right hand a curved knife and in her left hand
skull cup full of ambrosia of wisdom nectar her right arm is around vatrasattva's neck
and there again in union the inseparable union of wisdom and compassion of emptiness and
appearances
is vatrasattva and then in vatrasattva's heart
is again a little moon lotus and moon disc and standing on that in vatrasattva's heart
is a little crystal five-pointed vadra and then in the five-pointed vadra
in the heart the source of all phenomena of the vadra is a hung syllable
the letter hung and then wrote to shining brilliantly with brilliant white
circulating clockwise around that all the the syllables of the hundred syllable mantra are
resounding and shining out throughout all the galaxies throughout all the buddha realms
throughout all samsara and vatrasattva in union above our head the great teacher is then just
shining the brilliant wisdom light and full of bliss and freedom and bodhicitta and kindness
and omniscience again seeing every single thing as it is and knowing us so deeply so profoundly
and then ourselves with them as witness kind of purifying recognizing our mistakes and not knowing
purifying and then from the great bliss of our of vatrasattva kind of a nectar stream is dripping
and and kind of showering us and just moving through us cleansing our gross body cleansing
our subtle body kind of we can imagine too they say that nectar stream is coming down and filling
our central channel and moving throughout all the channels of our our body and through all the
junctures of our channels all of our chakras are becoming pure and full of this wisdom light just
shining brilliant white with all the five colors scintillating shining you know just really filling
all of our channels overflowing purifying all of our negativities and all our negativities
can be visualized as kind of being washed out as all kinds of disease and you know sometimes they
say visualize as insects and you know just filth going and then also that all of our our
obscurations and their causes are completely purified and then true the ground is even opening
up and all of the beings to which we have karmic debts all of our our karmic debts are purified
they receive everything they need everything they ever wanted everything they need for
temporary and ultimate peace is completely satisfied all of our our own obscurations and
our karmic debts are completely purified and this is all as we're reciting the 100 syllable mantra
removing using the four powers usually this visualization if you want to like i don't know
if anyone's done this but if you're ever one way is if you imagine like if you're ever standing out
or you have the opportunity and there's like a you have like a hose or something and it's a bright
blue sky in the sun and if you like kind of point the the water up in the air into the sun and just
that brilliant light shining through the clear water just the nectar is just streaming and flowing
and purifying ourselves and all of our relations and all of our connections and all beings without
exception you know until eventually everyone is completely purified and revealed in the three kaya
state of vatrasatva all appearances all forms are the enlightened body of vatrasatva all sound and
movement is the enlightened speech of vatrasatva and the mantra of vatrasatva all thoughts and
conceptions and perceptions are the mind of vatrasatva just that three kaya state all is the pure
land of vatrasatva so we're reciting the hundred syllable mantra and then in this last stage where
things are purifying then vatrasatva kind of comes into light and comes down into our heart
and then we recite the six syllable mantra of vatrasatva for a while just again contemplating
visualizing all all existence all phenomena is the pure land of three kaya state of vatrasatva
and then eventually we can then just bring our mind to the the hong and the the syllable going
and then the syllable kind of dissolves into the hong the six syllables and then the hong gradually
dissolves from the bottom up into the top and and then we'll just rest in our awareness
rest in rikpa you know that's really profound purification
okay so now we'll do that
above one's head is vatrasatva inseparable from the llama from vatrasatva's body a nectar stream
descends purifying one's obscurations
um
so
vatrasatva melts into light and becomes mingled in one taste with one's own perceptions
go to the guru yoga
oneself is vadra yogini and in the sky in front the root teacher manifests in the form of padma
sambhava
all the buddhas of the three times without exception most excellent root teacher i pray
to you in this and future lives and in the bardo in these three hold me with your compassion bless
me ceaselessly throughout the three times the embodiment of all the buddhas of the three times
without exception most excellent root teacher i pray to you in this and future lives and in the
bardo in these three hold me with your compassion bless me ceaselessly throughout the three times
the embodiment of all the buddhas of the three times without exception most excellent root
teacher i pray to you in this and future lives and in the bardo in these three hold me with your
compassion bless me ceaselessly throughout the three times
oh
um
is
the blessings and empowerments of body speech and mind are completely and perfectly obtained
the
the llama dissolves into light is absorbed into oneself and becomes inseparable with one's own
state of being behold the emptiness awareness the true face of the llama
is
i pray to the protector amitaba the buddha of limitless light grant me the blessing to become
accomplished in the profound path of poa i pray to the protector amitaba the buddha of limitless
light grant me the blessing to become accomplished in the profound path of poa i pray to the
protector amitaba the buddha of limitless light grant me the blessing to become accomplished in
the profound path of poa
now my body possessions and the source of my virtue all together i give without clinging to
all beings who have been my parents may i accomplish great benefits unobstructedly for all beings
all beings who have been my parents may i accomplish great benefits unobstructedly for
all beings now my body possessions and the source of my virtue all together i give without clinging
to all beings who have been my parents may i accomplish great benefits unobstructedly for all
beings
okay just before we seal our practice with our dedication and aspiration prayers
um and then specifically in relation to the vatrasattva practice i just thought to say a
couple more things um one is of course while we're reciting the mantra just really resting
our awareness doing the meditation focusing on each syllable as best we can letting that
all just reverberate throughout our channels and in our space but then this mantra in particular
right the mantras are so profound so vast in meaning but there's a beautiful
translation or kind of teaching that i think Duryam Rinpoche gave i think that's
yeah it's in the back of this book by Venerable Kempos
and one of the appendices like on page 191 Duryam Rinpoche's explanation of the meaning
of the hundred syllable mantra so of course it's part of the meaning connecting with the actual
actualizing of our bodhicitta and our vatrasattva is the real meaning and so profound the mantras
aren't any one but so rich and then in particular the vatra like i mentioned before the vows that
vatrasattva gave and that connection as vatrasattva being the ultimate power of purification you
know
on the vajayana level it's also purifying all of our on the bodhicitta level on the pratimoksha
level on the ordinary level all these are being purified so powerfully and profoundly by these
skillful means of putting all these four powers into use and applying the meditation and it's said
also in the teachings that like i mentioned as we since we are holding
at least in our aspiration all the vows of the the nine yanas the vows of the vajayana vows of the
mahayana vows of the pratimoksha you know and just trying to be good people in the world
helpful people in the world since we have these but especially since again we're we're purifying
and we're trying to uphold all what's good and it for everyone everywhere naturally and then
through
the great supports and skillful means of the vows and samayas and the teachings that we hold and
that we truly aspire to realize and recognize for the benefit of all beings until we don't truly
have that realization we're always that means we have obscurations right and so always purifying
is good and so as holders of the secret vajrayana which naturally embodies all the all the
teachings
and practices of the buddha it said if in the teachings if we can do vajrasattva practice daily
21 recite the hundred syllable mantra again with all the four powers and the visualization and
meditation it really helps keep our clean and we're going to be purifying any mistakes we've made
on any level in the day and then it said if we can pure if we can do a whole mala
concentrating one pointedly uninterruptedly on vajrasattva reciting the hundred syllable mantra
that purifies just countless lifetimes of obscurations and mistakes and then of course
so that's just as vajrayana practitioners whether we're doing our nundra or completed our nundra
definitely right vajrasattva is in every practice but just again to keep our connections pure
with our teacher and the teachings the buddha dharmasanga the gurus devas dakinis and dharmapalas
doing the vajrasattva practice each day is just really encouraged at least
21 times then of course when we're doing our vad our nundra accumulations we actually accumulate
hundred thousand and then we just keep going keep going keep going until we're fully enlightened so
for the benefit of all so i just thought to add those few extra thoughts and now we'll
dedicate the merit of our practice and make our vast aspiration prayers and then having done that
will go up and with the worlds to the best of our abilities with our mindfulness alertness
conscientiousness keeping our view our meditation and very careful with our conduct according to
our current capacities okay so we'll start on page 29 in our treasury of mantras and prayers
long life prayers for our teachers and then we'll go on with our dedication and aspiration prayers
by this merit may all obtain
omniscience may it defeat the enemy wrongdoing from the stormy waves of birth old age sickness
and death from the ocean of samsara may i free all beings may the soul source of benefit and
happiness the buddhist teachings remained for a long time and may the victory banner of the lives
of the noble ones the holders of the teachings remain firm may all the temples and monasteries
all the readings and recitations of dharma flourish may the sangha always be in harmony
and may our aspirations be achieved the soul remedy for the suffering of sentient beings
the source of every joy is the teaching may it remain honorably upheld and flourish for a long
time may all the numberless beings who are sick be quickly freed from sickness may all the afflict
ions
of sentient beings never again arise may all sentient beings always be joyful may all burst
into lower realms cease forever may the wishes of all the bodhisattvas and all the boomis swiftly
reach fruition at this very moment for the peoples and nations of the earth may not even the names
disease famine war and suffering be heard and rather may pure conduct merit wealth and prosperity
increase and may supreme good fortune and well-being always arise the precious bodhicitta in those
without it may it be generated in those who have it may it never diminish and always continue
increasing throughout the succession of lives and to which i shall be born may i obtain the
seven qualities of the upper realms of existence may i meet the dharma immediately after taking
birth and have the freedom to practice accordingly may i please the holy lamas and practice dharma
day and night by understanding the dharma and practicing its inmost essence in that life may
i cross the ocean of samsara in samsara may expound the excellent holy doctrine may i not become
bored
and tired of accomplishing the benefit of others by my own tremendous and partial service to others
may everyone attain buddhahood together may the lotus fee to the guru who glorifies the
teachings be firm may the noble ones who hold the teachings encompass the earth may the prosperity
and dominion of the patrons of the teachings increase and may the teachings auspiciously
remain for a long time may the secret treasures of all the victorious ones their incomparably
supreme teachings arise as the sun in the sky gloriously pervading the entire universe
nectar essence of all the teachings of the victorious one great charioteer of the secret
vajrayana teachings of the early translation school emanation of nubchen sanjay yashe great
may your profound treasure pervade the entire world may the soul swift path of all the buddhas
the supreme vehicle the great perfection unanimously praised by all the victorious ones
the early translation school tradition of the king of the victorious ones padmasambhava
the conqueror's doctrine pervade auspiciously throughout all directions may the great tradition
of kempo shantarakshita lopompadmasambhava and dharma king tresundetsan increase and spread
throughout the three realm world may the appearance of the three jewels and the mind streams of
beings
remain inseparable and bring sublime well-being throughout the three times
deity mantra and dharma kaya are the nature of appearance sound and awareness the pervasive kaya
and wisdom display of the buddhas may practitioners of the profound and secret great perfection
remain inseparable from the innermost untaste awareness of wisdom mind
watch your sleep though
so
thank you again everyone taking the time to come and practice together reflect on the meaning and
really immediately put the practice put it all right into practice so wonderful and thank you
and sorry we've gone over a little bit but thank you for holding out and just concluding together
we'll meet again next saturday for nundro at 3 30 so hope you can join and i think monday is the
10th day and i just in case anyone's wondering we will be observing the 10th day but we will not
have a webcast on monday rempoche is still traveling and so please have your practice enjoy
and we'll be doing that here as well as in the other centers and we'll see you next week thank you
you